Chapter One: Introduction
Topics of Discussion and Structure of the Paper
Since its inception, bitcoin, a virtual currency, has grown in both its popularity and its
use. Despite this, there still exists a relative dearth of economic analysis in academia about this
new economic phenomenon. Various topics have been researched with regard to bitcoin,
including its economic status as a currency (Yermack 2013), the incentives of bitcoin miners
(Kroll et al 2013), the economics of bitcoin exchange prices (Ciaian et al 2014), among others.
Macroeconomist Paul Krugman weighed in strongly on the normative side of the economic
debate with his article “Bitcoin is Evil” published in late 2013.
The object of this paper is to investigate a yet unexplored topic in bitcoin, purchasing
power parity, and utilize a different approach to the topic explored by Kroll et al, the economics
of bitcoin mining. Therefore, the structure of the paper will be as follows. The remainder of
chapter one will provide a brief history of bitcoin and an explanation of how bitcoin operates.
Chapter two, entitled “Purchasing Power Parity in the Bitcoin Exchange Market” will analyze
bitcoin from the perspective of purchasing power parity across three different currency exchange
markets in which bitcoin trades. Chapter three, entitled “An Economic Analysis of Bitcoin
Mining,” analyzes bitcoin from the perspective of the users that verify bitcoin transactions.
Chapter four concludes. Note that there are separate appendices at the end of chapters two and
three. All references are listed at the end.
The History of Bitcoin
Bitcoin (sometimes known by its generally accepted ticker BTC) is an online payment
system launched as on open source software in 2009. Its creator (or creators), whose identity to 
2
this day remains unknown, goes by the name Satoshi Nakamoto. Nakamoto published a paper
describing his or her creation entitled “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System” in 2008.
In many ways it functions as a currency, whereby one party can send a unit of currency
(in this case a string of code) to another party in exchange for a good or service. As such, bitcoin
is often referred to as a “virtual currency” or “cryptocurrency.” All transfers of bitcoin are
verified and then recorded on a public ledger known as the block chain (Velde 2013).
Potential users can purchase bitcoin by using an online exchange. These exchanges act
as either brokers or dealers in allowing users to convert a major currency such as the U.S. dollar
into bitcoins. The first of these exchanges, Bitcoin Market, open in February 2010. Another
exchange, MtGox, first launched in July of that same year.